.TH Z_TABLE_COLADARCI 1 "June 2026" "Coladarci Z-Table Utilities" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
z_table_coladarci \- Exact z-table lookups from Coladarci et al. Appendix C, Table A for hypothesis testing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B python z_table_coladarci_appendix_c.py
[\fB\-\-z\fR Z]
[\fB\-\-p\-value\fR]
[\fB\-\-critical\fR]
[\fB\-\-alpha\fR ALPHA]
[\fB\-\-tails\fR {1,2}]
[\fB\-\-batch\-stdin\fR]
[\fB\-\-batch\-csv\fR FILE]
[\fB\-\-batch\-jsonl\fR FILE]
[\fB\-\-batch\-jsonl\-stdin\fR]
[\fB\-\-z\-key\fR KEY]
[\fB\-\-add\-columns\fR COLS]
[\fB\-\-output\fR FILE]
[\fB\-\-format\fR {human,csv,json,jsonl}]
[\fB\-\-demo\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B z_table_coladarci
provides \fIexact\fR values from the normal curve (z) table in
.IR "Fundamentals of Statistical Reasoning in Education"
(Coladarci et al.), Appendix C, Table A.

All lookups round the input z to two decimal places exactly as a student does when using the printed book.
No external statistical libraries are used for the core table lookup; every number is taken directly from the textbook.

This is a generic utility for researchers and students performing hypothesis tests that rely on the normal distribution (z-tests or large-sample approximations to t-tests). It returns:

- Area between the mean and z (textbook Column 2)
- Tail probability / area beyond z (textbook Column 3)
- One- or two-tailed p-values
- Critical z values for a given alpha level

It is designed to be used from the command line (with support for CSV and JSONL batch processing and standard input piping) or imported as a Python module for integration into analysis scripts and validation pipelines.

The module and man page deliberately avoid project-specific branding so the tool can be reused across different statistical projects while still matching the exact printed table from the referenced textbook (Chapter 6 for normal curve interpretation; Chapter 11 for z-test logic, p-values, and critical regions).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-z " " Z
Look up a single z-value (positive or negative). The value is rounded to two decimals internally.
.TP
.BR \-\-p\-value
With \fB\-\-z\fR, compute and report the p-value. Combine with \fB\-\-tails\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-critical
Report the critical z value(s) that leave the desired tail probability for a given alpha. Requires \fB\-\-alpha\fR (default 0.05).
.TP
.BR \-\-alpha " " ALPHA
Significance level used with \fB\-\-critical\fR (e.g. 0.05, 0.01, 0.10).
.TP
.BR \-\-tails " " {1,2}
1 = one-tailed, 2 = two-tailed (default). Two-tailed is the standard choice for most non-directional hypotheses in Chapter 11.
.TP
.BR \-\-batch\-stdin
Read one numeric z value per line from standard input. Ideal for quick shell pipes.
.TP
.BR \-\-batch\-csv " " FILE
Read a CSV file. Looks for the column named by \fB\-\-z\-key\fR (default "z"), computes the requested columns, and writes an augmented CSV.
.TP
.BR \-\-batch\-jsonl " " FILE
Process a JSONL file (one JSON object per line). This is the native format for EduPulse session manifests and many validation intermediates. The script looks for the key given by \fB\-\-z\-key\fR (falls back to common alternatives such as observed_z, z_stat). Appended fields are written back.
.TP
.BR \-\-batch\-jsonl\-stdin
Same as \fB\-\-batch\-jsonl\fR but reads the stream from stdin. Perfect for:
.br
cat manifest.jsonl | python z_table... --batch-jsonl-stdin ...
.TP
.BR \-\-z\-key ", " \-\-z\-column " " KEY
Field name (JSON) or column name (CSV) that contains the z-statistic you want to look up. Default: "z".
.TP
.BR \-\-add\-columns " " COLS
Comma-separated list of textbook values to compute in batch mode. Valid tokens:
.br
area  - Area between the mean and z (Column 2)
.br
tail  - Area beyond z (Column 3 / tail probability)
.br
p     - p-value (respecting \fB\-\-tails\fR)
.br
Default: "area,tail,p"
.TP
.BR \-\-output " " FILE
Destination for batch output. When omitted, results are written to stdout. Format is controlled by \fB\-\-format\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-format " " {human,csv,json,jsonl}
Output style for batch results and single-value queries.
.br
human  - readable text (default)
.br
csv    - comma-separated values
.br
json   - pretty JSON array/object
.br
jsonl  - one JSON object per line (excellent for further piping)
.TP
.BR \-\-demo
Run the built-in educational demonstration (classic z = 1.96, critical values, symmetry, etc.) and exit. Useful for teaching or quick sanity checks.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show this help message and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Look up a single value and its two-tailed p-value:
.br
  python z_table_coladarci_appendix_c.py --z 1.96 --p-value --tails 2

Find the critical value used in a typical alpha = .05 test:
.br
  python z_table_coladarci_appendix_c.py --critical --alpha 0.05 --tails 2

Pipe a stream of z-statistics (one per line):
.br
  echo -e "1.96\n2.58\n-1.65" | python z_table_coladarci_appendix_c.py --batch-stdin --tails 2 --format csv

Process a JSONL research data file and add textbook-derived columns:
.br
  python z_table_coladarci_appendix_c.py \\
      --batch-jsonl study_data.jsonl \\
      --z-key observed_z --add-columns area,tail,p \\
      --output study_data_with_pvalues.csv

Same thing from a pipe:
.br
  cat results.jsonl | python z_table_coladarci_appendix_c.py --batch-jsonl-stdin --z-key z_stat --format jsonl

Use inside Python (for analysis scripts or validation pipelines):
.br
  from z_table_coladarci_appendix_c import get_p_value, find_critical_z
  p = get_p_value(my_computed_z, tails=2)
  crit = find_critical_z(0.05, tails=2)
.SH INTEGRATION
The Python API is intentionally simple so it can be dropped into any analysis or validation script:

  from z_table_coladarci_appendix_c import get_p_value as textbook_p_value

Use \fBtextbook_p_value(observed_z, tails=2)\fR (or the critical value function) whenever you are performing or reporting z-based tests that should match the exact printed table in the Coladarci textbook.

JSONL and CSV batch modes are provided because many research pipelines produce per-observation statistics in these formats.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I z_table_coladarci_appendix_c.py
The executable Python module containing the hard-coded table and lookup functions.
.TP
.I man/z_table_coladarci.1
This manual page.
.SH SEE ALSO
Coladarci, T. et al. \fIFundamentals of Statistical Reasoning in Education\fR (source of Appendix C, Table A).
.br
Standard references on z-tests and the normal approximation to the t-test for large samples.
.SH AUTHOR
Generic utility derived from textbook table for reproducible statistical work.
.SH COPYRIGHT
The numeric values are taken verbatim from the referenced textbook. The code is provided for educational and research use.
